=kurama=

'''Version:''' 0.3.4

'''Description:''' Simple Static site generator written in Rust

'''Author:''' Bryce Campbell

'''Copyright:''' 2022

'''LICENSE:''' See LICENSE

While there are many static site generators out there, 
one of which also uses a Jinja-like templating engine, 
I wanted a system in which I could 
specify configuration in the JSON format and 
utilizing Jinja, 
so that I could migrate my own website from 
<a href="https://blog.getpelican.com/">Pelican</a> 
with minimal effort, 
and break up the navigation from general configuration.

This static site generator is my homebrewed solution to that trouble.

==Version History==

<dl>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">0.3.4</dt>
<dd>
<p>Minor change.</p>
<p>Implement sitemap.</p>
<p>Released Jul 10, 2026</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">0.3.3</dt>
<dd>
<p>Major change.</p>
<p>Trim out unnecessary fluff, 
like merging post into page module, 
with determination based on presence of date, 
and redundant inclusions of sections and links.</p>
<p>Because of this change, templates need to be updated.</p>
<p>Also permalinks in JSON are fixed.</p>
<p>Released Jul 7, 2026</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">0.3.2</dt>
<dd>
<p>Minor change.</p>
<p>Fixs bugs and display more helpful errors when page rendering fails.</p>
<p>Released Jul 5, 2026</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">0.3.1</dt>
<dd>
<p>Major change.</p>
<p>Fix bug where initial configuration is yaml.</p>
<p>Released Jul 3, 2026</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">0.3.0</dt>
<dd>
<p>Major change.</p>
<p>Add ability to create posts, implement pagination.</p>
<p>This allow kurama to be used for blogging, or to create a news feed.</p>
<p>However, there is no support for tags or categories at this time, and there is no post clipping.</p>
<p>Released Jul 2, 2026</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">0.2.0</dt>
<dd>
<p>Minor Update.</p>
<p>Update dependencies and break code into separate modules.</p>
<p>Because of the changes, 
this program will only compile with Rust edition 2024 or later.</p>
<p>Released Jul 7, 2025</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">0.1.1</dt>
<dd>
<p>Minor Update.</p>
<p>Add naive file watching to dev server.</p>
<p>Released Feb. 16, 2022</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">0.1</dt>
<dd>
<p>Initial release.</p>
<p>Released Feb. 15, 2022</p>
</dd>
</dl>

==Installing==

To install this application, 
either download the appropriate installer file 
and install it like you would typically do, or you can compile and 
install from source via this repo.

The mac package is for both Intel and Apple Silicon macs.

==Create Website==

There are two ways of create a website, dependeing on what you want.

If you want to create a new directory to hold your website files, you can simply do this:

<pre>
kurama create path/to/directory
</pre>

This will create a folder with the same file hierarchy as seen below, 
except for the <strong>links.json</strong> and output folder. 
All nonexisting folders should be created with the site folder.

If you want to make the current working directory 
the location of your site files, 
that can be done with something as simple as the following:

<pre>
kurama init
</pre>

This will create all necessary folders and generate a config file.

==Build Website==

To build the website, after getting everything into place, 
run the following in the directory containing your site files.

<pre>
kurama generate
</pre>

This will create an output directory, 
which contained the generated HTML files 
and the assets that were copied over.

==Preview Website==

If you would like to preview your website before publishing it,
run the following in the directory containing your site files:

<pre>
kurama serve
</pre>

This starts a server on your local machine that listens to any incoming traffic on port 8080.

The content is served from the output directory.

The server has a default index of 
<strong>index.html</strong>.

While the server is running, 
the output folder will be recreated every 10 seconds, 
so changes made to the content will be visible shortly after saving.

==File Hierarchy==

The expected structure of a website is as follows:

<pre>
hello
|_assets
  |_css
  |_js
  |_images
|_content
|_templates
|_output
|_config.json
|_links.json
</pre>

The templates folder contains the files to be used to layout your pages. 
All files in here are automatically loaded in when the site gets generated
and are expected to have html extensions.

As of right now, 
the only template file required is <strong>page.html</strong>, 
which is used to take page content and generate the HTML.

The content folder houses the webpages for the site and 
can have any extensions, though the program expects Markdown content.

config.json is used to set site settings, such as the name of the site.

links.json is used for menus and navigation. Depending on the structure presented in the links file, 
you will either get a list of links or a list of links broken up into sections.

The assets folder holds files that are necessary for the website 
and are copied over as is to the <strong>output</strong> folder, 
which will contain the files that can be uploaded to a web host.

However, the assets folder can only contain the folders as seen above in 
the hierarchy. 

There can be subfolders though, which <strong>should</strong> get copied over as well, but I am uncertain 
if those files will get served by the serve included in this project.

==Creating Pages==

Pages are created like this inside the content folder:

<pre>
---
title: Hello, World!
slug: index
---
# Welcome to oblivion!
</pre>

<strong>title</strong> sets the page's title 
and the <strong>slug</strong> sets the output filename, which the program will append 
<strong>html</strong> upon generation.

The three dashes seen are manadatory, 
as that separates page information from the content of the page.

If you so desire, You can use inline HTML for the content.

==Creating Posts==

Creating posts is down very much like posts. 
The only addition needed is to give it a date in YYYY-MM-DD format.

The front matter will look like this:

<pre>
---
title: Hello, World!
date: 2026-06-27T08:50:00-07:00
slug: index
---
</pre>

Posts will then be found in a directory called <strong>posts</strong>

in the output folder in a directory structure of YYYY/MM/DD.

==Menus/Navigation==

When setting up the website's navigation, 
you do so in two places, which are as follows:

<ul>
<li>The template</li>
<li>config.json</li>
</ul>

===Template===

In the template file, you need something like this:

<pre>
    <nav id="nav">
        {% if site.sections %}
            <ul>
            {% for section in site.sections %}
            <li>
                {{ section.name }}
                <ul>
                    {% for link in section.links %}
                        <li><a href="{{ link.url }}">{{ link.name }}</a></li>
                    {% endfor %}
                </ul>
            </li>
            {% endfor %}
            </ul>
        {% elif site.links %}
        <ul>
        {% for link in site.links %}
            <li><a href="{{ link.url }}">{{ link.name }}</a></li>
        {% endfor %}
        </ul>
        {% endif %}
    </nav>
</pre>

While this may be a bit long for most needs, 
since one should only need to check for either 
<strong>sections</strong> or <strong>links</strong>, 
this should give you and idea of what to implement for your needs.

===JSON===

The info from above is filled in with the data found in 
<strong>config.yaml</strong>.

To create sections links, you will do something like the following:

<pre>
[
    {
        "name": "Main",
        "links": [
            {
                "name": "Home",
                "url": "/"
            }
        ]
    }
]
</pre>

Creates a single section with a link to the home page.

If you just want a list of links, you will do this instead:

<pre>
   [
        {
            "name": "Home",
            "url": "/"
        }
    ]
</pre>

This creates a link back to the top level of the site on its own.

When the site is generated, both links and sections will be made available
<strong>sections</strong> or <strong>links</strong> 
over to your template.

It is <strong>recommended</strong> 
that you choose one of these styles rather than mix them, 
as it makes things easier to maintain and layout.

==Templates==

The templating engine used is called <a href="https://github.com/Keats/tera">Tera</a> template engine, which means Templates created in much the 
same way as they are with 
<a href="https://hyde.github.io/templates/index.html">Hyde</a> and other static site generators that use Jinja templates.

The following are some available context objects are: 

<dl>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">site</dt>
<dd>
<p>This gives access to data concerning the website.</p>
<p>You can get the website's title via <pre>site.name</pre>.</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">page</dt>
<dd>
<p>This give access to details concerning the page.</p>
<p>Things relating to page metadata are accessed via <pre>page.metadata</pre></p>
<p>For example, to grab the title of the page, it is as easy as <pre>page.metadata.title</pre></p>
<p>On a post, metadata does not exist. Instead the elements are properties of the page.</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">archive</dt>
<dd>
<p>This is like <strong>page</strong>, but only feature a property that gives you the current page number.</p>
<p>Archives pull other data from the main site configuration.</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">output_file</dt>
<dd>
<p>This is the file name that the current page will have when created.</p>
<p>This can be used to make helpful navigation for your website.</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">current_dir</dt>
<dd>
<p>This is only available on an archive, or where posts get listed.</p>
<p>If the blog is not at the root of the site, 
this is useful in creating helpful navigation, even when data has been paginated.</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">posts</dt>
<dd>
<p>This only exists for an archive. It gives you access to the posts contained on the page.</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">pages</dt>
<dd>
<p>This is another archive exclusive property that will return the total number of pages
in the archive.</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">next_page</dt>
<dd>
<p>This is another archive exclusive property that will return a link relative to the next page, if you aren't on the last page.</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">prev_pages</dt>
<dd>
<p>This is another archive exclusive property that will return the same kind of data as the next page, as long as you're not on the first page.</p>
</dd>
</dl>

To place the page content in a particular area, you would do something like this:

<pre>
{% block content %}
    {{ content }}
{% endblock content %}
</pre>

While it is not necessary for the block itself to be called 
<strong>content</strong>, 
The variable <strong>content</strong> is required because 
that is what the program passes the HTML 
version of the page content to the template.

==Site Configuration==

The site is configured in the <strong>config.json</strong>. 
This hold all data pertaining to the site, 
such as the site's name and tagline.

A minimal config file will look like this:

<pre>
{
    "name": "Hello, World",
    "url": "//example.com"
}
</pre>

The configuration currently has quite few settings, as seen below:

<dl>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">name</dt>
<dd>
The name of the website.
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">tagline</dt>
<dd>
The website's tagline.
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">url</dt>
<dd>
The website's full URL.
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">author</dt>
<dd>
The website's creator or owner.
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">blog_path</dt>
<dd>
The path for the archive. If this set, 
then you need to provide a separate name for the archive.
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">blog_name</dt>
<dd>
This is the name of the archive/blog. 
It is not needed if your site is a blog.
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">items_per_page</dt>
<dd>
<p>The number of posts to display per a page.
If this is not set or set to zero, then no pagination will occur.</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">pagination_method</dt>
<dd>
<p>Determines how pages will be paginated. The default is as a file.</p>
<p>Set this to <strong>dir</strong> use directory pagination.</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">links</dt>
<dd>
<p>List of links.</p>
<p>This is for a link list that is not sectioned off.</p>
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">section</dt>
<dd>
<p>LIst of liks divided into sections.
</dd>
<dt style="font-weight:bold">feed_url</dt>
<dd>
<p>The feed URL. This should be accessible in all templates, 
as all three page types are passed appropriate feed URLs, 
due to JSON feeds allowing pagination.</p>
<p>However, pages and posts will always point to the main feed.</p>
</dd>
</dl>

As can be seen above, only the name key is required, 
but as things progress, I may add more keys 
and some of those may become required too.

For now, I am keeping things simple because that is all I need.